README.md, before:

# pgwire-lite-rs

[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/pgwire-lite.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/pgwire-lite)
[![Documentation](https://docs.rs/pgwire-lite/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/pgwire-lite)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

A lightweight PostgreSQL wire protocol client library for Rust.

## Overview

**pgwire-lite** provides a simple, efficient interface for executing queries against PostgreSQL-compatible servers, including StackQL and other wire-protocol compatible services.

This crate was created for applications that need a robust, well-tested connection to PostgreSQL-compatible servers without the overhead of a full-featured ORM.

## Features

- **Simple API** - Straightforward query execution with minimal boilerplate
- **Robust Error Handling** - Comprehensive error information with configurable verbosity
- **Flexible Value Types** - Easy type conversion between PostgreSQL and Rust types
- **SSL/TLS Support** - Secure connections with TLS and certificate validation
- **Detailed Results** - Full access to all aspects of query results including notices
- **libpq Foundation** - Built on the stable, production-tested libpq C library

## Installation

Add this to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
pgwire-lite = "0.1.0"
```

## Quick Start

The following example connects to a local [**stackql**](https://github.com/stackql/stackql) server used to query cloud providers.

```rust
use pgwire_lite::PgwireLite;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Connect to a StackQL server
    let client = PgwireLite::new("localhost", 5444, false, "verbose")?;
    
    // Pull a provider registry
    client.query("REGISTRY PULL aws")?;
    
    // Query AWS resources using SQL
    let result = client.query(
        "SELECT region, name, instance_type 
         FROM aws.ec2.instances 
         WHERE region = 'us-east-1'"
    )?;
    
    // Process the results
    println!("Found {} EC2 instances:", result.row_count);
    for row in &result.rows {
        println!(
            "Instance: {} ({}), Type: {}", 
            row.get("name").unwrap(),
            row.get("region").unwrap(),
            row.get("instance_type").unwrap()
        );
    }
    
    Ok(())
}
```
## Error Handling

**pgwire-lite** provides detailed error information and configurable verbosity:

```rust
use pgwire_lite::PgwireLite;

fn main() {
    // Set verbosity to "verbose" for maximum error detail
    let client = PgwireLite::new("localhost", 5432, false, "verbose")
        .expect("Failed to create client");
    
    match client.query("SELECT * FROM nonexistent_table") {
        Ok(result) => {
            println!("Query succeeded with {} rows", result.row_count);
        },
        Err(e) => {
            eprintln!("Query failed: {}", e);
            // Detailed error with context, hint, line numbers, etc.
        }
    }
}
```

## TLS/SSL Support

Secure your connections with TLS:

```rust
use pgwire_lite::PgwireLite;
use std::env;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Set environment variables for TLS certificates
    env::set_var("PGSSLMODE", "verify-full");
    env::set_var("PGSSLCERT", "/path/to/client-cert.pem");
    env::set_var("PGSSLKEY", "/path/to/client-key.pem");
    env::set_var("PGSSLROOTCERT", "/path/to/server-ca.pem");
    
    // Create a client with TLS enabled
    let client = PgwireLite::new("db.example.com", 5432, true, "default")?;
    
    // Execute queries over a secure connection
    let result = client.query("SELECT 1 as secure_conn_example")?;
    
    Ok(())
}
```

## Documentation

For more detailed usage examples and API documentation, please visit [docs.rs/pgwire-lite](https://docs.rs/pgwire-lite).

## Building Locally

This project depends on `libpq` (PostgreSQL client library) which needs to be available at compile time.

```bash
# Linux (Ubuntu/Debian)
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y libclang-dev libpq-dev pkg-config

# macOS
brew update
brew install postgresql libpq
# after installing with Homebrew on macOS, you may need to add libpq to your PATH:
echo 'export PATH="/usr/local/opt/libpq/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.zshrc
# or for Intel Macs with Homebrew in the default location
# for Apple Silicon Macs, use: echo 'export PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/libpq/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.zshrc

# Also set these environment variables for the compiler to find libpq
export LDFLAGS="-L/usr/local/opt/libpq/lib"
export CPPFLAGS="-I/usr/local/opt/libpq/include"
```

### Building the project

To build locally use:

```bash
cargo build            	# Debug build
cargo build --release  	# Release build
```

### Testing the project

The tests provided can be performed with a [`stackql`](https://github.com/stackql/stackql) server.  

> Download [`stackql`](https://github.com/stackql/stackql) using:
> ```bash
> curl -L https://bit.ly/stackql-zip -O && unzip stackql-zip
> ```

To run the examples and integration tests you will need to set invalid AWS credentials (to test an error condition), use this:

```bash
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="DUMMYKEYID"
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="DUMMYSECRETACCESSKEY"
```

#### Without TLS

To test the library with a local server *without* tls, run the following:

```bash
sh start-server.sh
cargo test --test integration
sh stop-server.sh
```

To run the examples:

```bash
sh start-server.sh
RUST_LOG=debug cargo run --example simple_query # debug mode
cargo run --example simple_query
sh stop-server.sh
```
#### Without TLS

To test the library with a local server *with* tls, run the following:

```bash
sh start-secure-server.sh
cargo run --example simple_query_with_mtls
sh stop-server.sh
```

### Documenting the project

To document the project locally, use:

```bash
cargo doc                # Generate documentation
cargo doc --no-deps      # Generate docs excluding dependencies
```

### Other utilities

Other useful `cargo` utilities include:

```bash
cargo fmt --all         # Formats all code according to Rust style guidelines
cargo check             # Compiles without building an executable (pre build check)
cargo clippy            # Suggests code improvements (linter)
```

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

## Acknowledgments

- [libpq](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/libpq.html) C library
- [stackql](https://github.com/stackql/stackql)

Commit message:

added diags and fixed tests

README.md, after:

# pgwire-lite-rs

[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/pgwire-lite.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/pgwire-lite)
[![Documentation](https://docs.rs/pgwire-lite/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/pgwire-lite)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

A lightweight PostgreSQL wire protocol client library for Rust.

## Overview

**pgwire-lite** provides a simple, efficient interface for executing queries against PostgreSQL-compatible servers, including StackQL and other wire-protocol compatible services.

This crate was created for applications that need a robust, well-tested connection to PostgreSQL-compatible servers without the overhead of a full-featured ORM.

## Features

- **Simple API** - Straightforward query execution with minimal boilerplate
- **Robust Error Handling** - Comprehensive error information with configurable verbosity
- **Flexible Value Types** - Easy type conversion between PostgreSQL and Rust types
- **SSL/TLS Support** - Secure connections with TLS and certificate validation
- **Detailed Results** - Full access to all aspects of query results including notices
- **libpq Foundation** - Built on the stable, production-tested libpq C library

## Installation

Add this to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
pgwire-lite = "0.1.0"
```

## Quick Start

The following example connects to a local [**stackql**](https://github.com/stackql/stackql) server used to query cloud providers.

```rust
use pgwire_lite::PgwireLite;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Connect to a StackQL server
    let client = PgwireLite::new("localhost", 5444, false, "verbose")?;
    
    // Pull a provider registry
    client.query("REGISTRY PULL aws")?;
    
    // Query AWS resources using SQL
    let result = client.query(
        "SELECT region, name, instance_type 
         FROM aws.ec2.instances 
         WHERE region = 'us-east-1'"
    )?;
    
    // Process the results
    println!("Found {} EC2 instances:", result.row_count);
    for row in &result.rows {
        println!(
            "Instance: {} ({}), Type: {}", 
            row.get("name").unwrap(),
            row.get("region").unwrap(),
            row.get("instance_type").unwrap()
        );
    }
    
    Ok(())
}
```
## Error Handling

**pgwire-lite** provides detailed error information and configurable verbosity:

```rust
use pgwire_lite::PgwireLite;

fn main() {
    // Set verbosity to "verbose" for maximum error detail
    let client = PgwireLite::new("localhost", 5432, false, "verbose")
        .expect("Failed to create client");
    
    match client.query("SELECT * FROM nonexistent_table") {
        Ok(result) => {
            println!("Query succeeded with {} rows", result.row_count);
        },
        Err(e) => {
            eprintln!("Query failed: {}", e);
            // Detailed error with context, hint, line numbers, etc.
        }
    }
}
```

## TLS/SSL Support

Secure your connections with TLS:

```rust
use pgwire_lite::PgwireLite;
use std::env;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Set environment variables for TLS certificates
    env::set_var("PGSSLMODE", "verify-full");
    env::set_var("PGSSLCERT", "/path/to/client-cert.pem");
    env::set_var("PGSSLKEY", "/path/to/client-key.pem");
    env::set_var("PGSSLROOTCERT", "/path/to/server-ca.pem");
    
    // Create a client with TLS enabled
    let client = PgwireLite::new("db.example.com", 5432, true, "default")?;
    
    // Execute queries over a secure connection
    let result = client.query("SELECT 1 as secure_conn_example")?;
    
    Ok(())
}
```

## Documentation

For more detailed usage examples and API documentation, please visit [docs.rs/pgwire-lite](https://docs.rs/pgwire-lite).

## Building Locally

This project depends on `libpq` (PostgreSQL client library) which needs to be available at compile time.

```bash
# Linux (Ubuntu/Debian)
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y libclang-dev libpq-dev pkg-config

# macOS
brew update
brew install postgresql libpq
# after installing with Homebrew on macOS, you may need to add libpq to your PATH:
echo 'export PATH="/usr/local/opt/libpq/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.zshrc
# or for Intel Macs with Homebrew in the default location
# for Apple Silicon Macs, use: echo 'export PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/libpq/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.zshrc

# Also set these environment variables for the compiler to find libpq
export LDFLAGS="-L/usr/local/opt/libpq/lib"
export CPPFLAGS="-I/usr/local/opt/libpq/include"
```

### Building the project

To build locally use:

```bash
cargo build            	# Debug build
cargo build --release  	# Release build
```

### Testing the project

The tests provided can be performed with a [`stackql`](https://github.com/stackql/stackql) server.  

> Download [`stackql`](https://github.com/stackql/stackql) using:
> ```bash
> curl -L https://bit.ly/stackql-zip -O && unzip stackql-zip
> ```

#### Without TLS

To test the library with a local server *without* tls, run the following:

```bash
sh start-server.sh
cargo test --test integration
# or with verbose output
RUST_LOG=debug cargo test --test integration -- --nocapture
sh stop-server.sh
```

To run the examples with a local server *without* tls, use the following:

```bash
sh start-server.sh
cargo run --example simple_query
# or with verbose output
RUST_LOG=debug cargo run --example simple_query
sh stop-server.sh
```
#### With TLS

To test the library with a local server *with* tls, run the following:

```bash
sh start-secure-server.sh
cargo test --test integration_mtls
# or with verbose output
RUST_LOG=debug cargo test --test integration_mtls -- --nocapture
sh stop-server.sh
```
To run the examples with a local server *with* tls, use the following:

```bash
sh start-secure-server.sh
cargo run --example simple_query_with_mtls
# or with verbose output
RUST_LOG=debug cargo run --example simple_query_with_mtls
sh stop-server.sh
```

### Documenting the project

To document the project locally, use:

```bash
cargo doc                # Generate documentation
cargo doc --no-deps      # Generate docs excluding dependencies
```

### Other utilities

Other useful `cargo` utilities include:

```bash
cargo fmt --all         # Formats all code according to Rust style guidelines
cargo check             # Compiles without building an executable (pre build check)
cargo clippy            # Suggests code improvements (linter)
```

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

## Acknowledgments

- [libpq](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/libpq.html) C library
- [stackql](https://github.com/stackql/stackql)
